+++
title="ECE250 Algorithms"
date=2024-02-22
[taxonomies]
tags=["uwaterloo-2a"]
+++

# Midterm

Know the following:

- The definition of an algorithm
- Systematic devising of algorithms
- Determine algorithm given outputs
- Big O notation, asymptotic behaviour, conventions
- Determine time complexity and the big O relationship
- Abstract data types, abstraction and why it is useful
- Queues, stacks, sets, and maps: definitions and common operations
- Given a problem, select the appropriate ADT.
- Implement stacks and queues using either an array or a linked list.

Linked lists:

- Singly and doubly linked lists
- Basic linked list operations: insertion, deletion and search
- Array comparision
- Solve a linked list problem such as the removing of duplicates or search, given a class definition.

Trees:

- Define the terms "full tree," "complete tree," "binary tree," and "binary search tree."
- Know how to perform inorder, preorder, and postorder traversal. Write down the order of node visits.
- Draw a resultant BST after operations.
- Define height and its relationship to depth.
- Know the rules of AVL and red-black trees and that they guarantee $\mathcal{O}(\log{N})$ operations.
- Know the pros and cons of each type of tree.
- Given a BST, determine if it satisfies the AVL/red-black ordering rules.
- Given an AVL or red-black tree, draw the resultant tree after inserting or removing one or more nodes.

Heaps and priority queues:

- Know the basic PQ operation time complexities.
- Know heap-ordering rules for min/max heaps.
- Know the operations to insert, delete, bubble up/down, and their time complexities.
- Given an array heap representation, find the parent/child or min/max.
- Draw a resultant heap from operations.
- Draw heap from an array (level-order traversal)
- Insert and remove heap elements.


