+++
title="ECE205 Calculus 3"
date=2024-02-12
draft=false
[taxonomies]
tags=["uwaterloo-2a"]
+++

**Midterm topics:**

1. Separable, exact, linear first order ODEs.
2. Integrating factors (for linear first order ODEs and exact ODEs)
3. Direction fields and solution sketching
4. Existence and Uniqueness Theorem for first-order ODEs
5. General theory of second-order linear equations: homogenous vs. non-homogenous equations, existence-uniqueness theorem, principle of superposition, structure of general solutions
6. Wronskians and fundamental sets of solutions
7. Reduction of order method for finding fundamental sets of solutions.
8. Characteristic polynomials for constant coefficient equations
9. Solving non-homogenous equations using the method of undetermined coefficients and variation of parameters
10. Mechanical vibrations: know basic terminology and the equations of motions, but not formulas for amplitudes and frequency gain


# Prerequisites

- [Complex calculus](/blog/complex-functions)

# What is a differential equation?

A _differential equation_ describes the relationship between a function and its derivatives. [^Braun]

For example, given $y(x)$, the equation

$$\frac{dy}{dx} = \frac{1}{1 + x^2}$$

is a differential equation.

{% example(ref="Heat equation") %}
The equations governing heat are also differential equations

$${\partial u \over \partial t} = k\frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial x^2}, k > 0$$
{% end %}

## Descriptors of differential equations

There are two _types_ of differential equations:

1. _Ordinary_ differential equations (ODEs) are of one variable.
2. _Partial_ differential equations (PDEs) are of many variables. The equations contain partial derivatives.

The _order_ of a differential equation is the order of the highest derivative that appears in the equation[^Braun].

The _solution_ is given by the _continuous function_ which satisfies the relationship described by the differential equation.
Solutions often exist only in certain intervals.

Physical problems that can be described by differential equations are based on _time-series functions_.
The initial condition is usually $t=0$ but must be $t \ge 0$.
The functions are of time and other parameters, and their derivatives.

{% example(ref="Mass-spring system") %}
Given a spring connected to a mass and a dashpot, how can we describe the general position equation of the system $x(t)$?

By Newton's second law, $\sum F_\text{external} = ma$.
Further, we know that the dashpot's friction force is proportional to the mass's velocity.
We can assign a proportionality constant $c$ and incorporate this force into our equation.
Finally, the force of the spring depends on the spring constant $k$.

$$\begin{align}\implies m\frac{d^2x}{dt^2} &= F(t) + F_\text{spring} + F_\text{dashpot} \\\\ &= F(t) - kx - c\frac{dx}{dt} \\\\ \implies F(t) &= m\frac{d^2x}{dt^2} + c\frac{dx}{dt} + kx\end{align}$$

This is a general equation of motion for a linearly dampened mass-spring system of second order.
{% end %}

{% example(ref="Simple linear circuit") %}
Given a circuit with

- external voltage source with voltage $E(t)$
- resistor with resistance $R$
- capacitor with capacitance $C$
- inductor with inductance $L$

all connected in series, determine the current common to all elements as a function of time $I(t)$.

Given $Q$ as the charge over our capacitor, we have

$$I = \frac{dQ}{dt}$$

We may express voltage drops over our elements relative to either $I$ or $Q$:

- Resistor: $V_R = IR$
- Capacitor: $V_C = \frac{1}{C} Q$
- Inductor: $V_L = L\frac{dI}{dt}$

The external voltage must be equal to the sum of voltage drops above.

$$\begin{align}\implies E(t) &= \sum V \\\\ &= IR + \frac{1}{C} Q + L\frac{dI}{dt} \\\\ &= \frac{dQ}{dt} R + \frac{1}{C} Q + L \frac{d^2Q}{dt^2} \\\\ \implies E'(t) &= RI' + \frac{1}{C} I + LI''\end{align}$$
{% end %}

Because the physical equations governing the mass-spring system and the linear circuit are both linear, the resulting ODEs are also linear!


# First-order ODEs

First-order ODEs are in three classes:

1. Separable
2. Exact
3. Linear

Any first-order ODE can be rewritten in the form:

$$\begin{equation}\frac{dy}{dt} = f(t, y)\end{equation}$$

where $f$ is a function of the independent variable $t$ and _the function_ $y(t)$.

For example, the ODE

$$3y^2\sin{(t+y)} - \frac{dy}{dt} = 0$$

becomes

$$\frac{dy}{dt} = 3y^2\sin{(t+y)}$$

with $f(t, y) = 3y^2\sin{(t+y)}$


## Direction fields

A direction field for equations of form (1) can be constructed by evaluating $f$ at each point of a rectangular grid.
At each point, draw a short line segment whose slope is the value of $f$.
Each line segment will be tangent to the graph of the solution passing through that point.


## Separable equations

A first-order ODE is _separable_ if $f$ can be written as a product of two functions, each of one variable:

$$\frac{dy}{dt} = f,\quad f(t, y) = g(t)\cdot h(y)$$

Such equations can be solved by integrating both sides:

$$\begin{align} &\frac{dy}{dt} = g(t)\cdot h(y)\\\\ &\implies \frac{1}{h(y)}\frac{dy}{dt} = g(t)\\\\ &\implies \int\frac{1}{h(y)} \frac{dy}{\bcancel{dt}}\\, \bcancel{dt} = \int g(t)\\, dt \\\\ &\implies \int \frac{1}{h(y)}\\, dy = \int g(t)\\, dt \end{align}$$

The result of the integration is a function of $y$ on the left and a function of $t$ on the right.
Solving for $y$ gives us our solution.


## Linear equations

A first-order ODE is _linear_ if it is of the form

$$\frac{dy}{dt} + p(t)y = q(t)$$

To solve, we can multiply the above by the non-zero function $\mu(t)$.
$\mu$ must satisfy the separable ODE:

$$\frac{d\mu}{dt} = \mu p$$

The reason why is because then, by the product rule:

$$\frac{d}{dt}(\mu y) = \mu y' + \mu' y$$

Which is equal to the left-hand side of the original equation.

We can then integrate both sides:

$$\begin{align} &\int \frac{d}{dt}(\mu y) \\, dt = \int q(t)\\, dt \\\\ &\implies \mu y = \int q(t)\\, dt + C\end{align}$$


## Exact equations

We can solve all first-order differential equations which can be put in the form

$$\frac{d}{dt} \phi(t, y) = 0$$

We can integrate both sides to get

$$\phi(t, y) = C$$

Equations that can be put in this form but are neither separable nor linear are _exact_.

How can we determine if an equation can be put in the above form?
Note that by the chain rule of partial differentiation

$$\frac{d}{dt}\phi(t, y(t)) = \frac{\partial\phi}{\partial t} + \frac{\partial \phi}{\partial y} \frac{dy}{dt}$$

Given a differential equation in most general form

$$M(t, y) + N(t, y) \frac{dy}{dt} = 0$$

It can only be written in the above form if and only if there exists a function $\phi(t, y)$ such that $M(t, y) = \frac{\partial \phi}{\partial t}$ and $N(t, y) = {\partial\phi\over\partial y}$.

{% theorem(ref="Existence and Uniqueness for 1st Order ODEs") %}
Let $M(t, y)$ and $N(t, y)$ be continuous and have continuous partial derivatives with respect to $t$ and $y$ in the rectangle $R$ defined with constants $a, b, c, d$:

$$R = \\{ (t, y)\\ \lvert\\ a < t < b,\quad c < y < d\\}$$

Then, there exists a function $\phi(t, y)$ such that

$$\left \\{ \begin{matrix} M(t, y) = \frac{\partial\phi}{\partial t} \\\\ \\\\ N(t, y) = \frac{\partial\phi}{\partial y} \end{matrix} \right .$$

if and only if the following holds in $R$:

$${\partial M \over \partial y} = {\partial N \over \partial t}$$
{% end %}

The differential equation

$$M(t, y) + N(t, y)\frac{dy}{dt} = 0$$

is said to be _exact_ if ${\partial M\over\partial y} = {\partial N\over\partial t}$.

> The reason for this definition, of course, is that the left-hand side ... is the exact derivative of a known function of $t$ and $y$ [^Braun]

To solve any exact equation, note that if $M$ is the partial derivative of $\phi(t, y)$, then

$$\phi(t, y) = \int M\\, dt + g(y)$$

Then we may find $g(y)$ by taking the partial derivative of the above with respect to $y$ and notice that that is equal to $N$:

$$\begin{align} N &= {\partial\phi \over \partial y} \\\\ &= {\partial\over\partial y}\left [ \int M\\, dt\right ] + g'(y)\end{align}$$

By comparing terms we may isolate $g'(y)$ and integration gives us our answer $\phi(t, y)$.
Setting $\phi$ to zero, we have our solutions.

$$\phi(t, y) = 0$$


## Integrating factors for exact equations

Some first-order ODEs are not exact but can be made exact using an integrating factor.

Given the ODE of form $M + N\frac{dy}{dt} = 0$, $\mu(t,y)$ is an _integrating factor_ if

$$\mu M + \mu N \frac{dy}{dt} = 0$$

is exact, with the restriction that the solution of the ODE does not contain $\mu(t,y) = 0$.

# References

[^Braun]: Martin Braun, _Differential Equations and Their Applications_, 4th ed, Published 1993, [[Online]](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-1-4612-4360-1)

[^Boyce]: William E. Boyce, Richard C. DiPrima, _Elementary Differential Equations and their Applications_, 10th ed, Published 2012, [Book]

[^Martin-Martinez]: Eduardo Martín-Martínez, _Math 211 / ECE 205 Notes_, Accessed 2024-01-09, [[Online]](https://sites.google.com/site/emmfis/teaching/math-211-ece-205)
